>> A shift in the moon's orbit
may lead to massive flooding
in the future.
What's really going on with
the moon's upcoming wobble?
This is "Gaia News."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In a new report from the
NASA Sea Level Change science
team at the
University of Hawaii,
scientists warn that an
upcoming natural phenomenon
in the moon's orbit combined
with rising sea levels
could cause record flooding
along coastal regions.
NASA administrator Bill Nelson
said in a statement, quote,
"Low-lying areas near sea
level are increasingly at risk
and suffering due to
the increased flooding,
and it will only get worse."
The moon affects tides
on Earth every day.
So why the cause for alarm now?
Astronomer and "Gaia News"
contributor Marc Dantonio.
>> Every 18.6 years the
moon reaches a point where
it's the highest
in its declination.
And that's the point
where it's going to also
be above the Earth's equator,
when the moon is actually also
at a point where it's
closest to the Earth because
of the elliptical orbit.
If all those things
correspond and combine
to be at one point
like this, then that
is where the researcher says
at the University of Hawaii
that we're looking at
potential flooding.
>> The moon moves in
an elliptical orbit.
As it revolves around the Earth,
its angle changes in relation
to the Earth's equator.
This is called its declination.
Every 18.6 years,
this declination
is at its highest point, called
a lunar standstill or wobble.
When this happens,
high tides are higher,
and low tides are lower.
>> What it means is that every
18.6 years the moon reaches
a point in the sky where it's
an additional five degrees above
our Earth's tilt in the sky.
That puts it a major standstill.
And if that
corresponds to a point
when the moon is also
closest to the Earth,
this researcher is
saying that this
is when we can end up having
some very dangerous tides
and/or flooding on the planet.
>> Researchers say the
combination of rising sea
levels and this natural
occurrence of higher tides due
to the moon's orbit could
lead to massive flooding
but won't be extreme
until the mid 2030s.
Should we hope for the
best or plan for the worst?
>> We had one of the
standstills in 2015 actually.
And I don't recall any
major problems there.
But 2016 had some record
flooding in the world.
But that was some distance away
from this standstill point.
So it remains to be seen.
We've done this before,
had this before.
And I'm not sure that it's
going to really be the worst.
That's my only gripe with it.
I mean, there might be
flooding of a low-lying parking
lot at a business for
a period of some months
like every morning or every
afternoon or whatever.
And if that's the
case, well, then that
could interrupt
business that way.
And that may happen.
But I don't think it's going
to be a catastrophic thing.
I think it's going
to come and go.
And people are going to go, was
something supposed to happen?
>> For a new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."